---
title: "Create a globally executable javascript file"
date: 2022-02-21T00:18:57+11:00
categories: 
  - "javascript"
tags: 
  - "javascript"
draft: false
---

We will understand and see how to create an executable javascript file using a global command.

Lets say for example you want to create a clone of 'ls' or 'cmd' command which shows the content of the current folder or from the path provided. To acheive that we need to have a global command.

To acheive this we need to do couple of things and need to have 2 files (index.js and package.json)

1. index.js will have the code that you to execute when running the command
2. package.json helps the binding the command to the index.js file


1) Create the file index.js in your project folder
```javascript
  #!/usr/bin/env node

  console.log("This file will be an executable file");
```

The first line in index.js **#!/usr/bin/env node** tells the system what interpreter to pass the file to for execution.

2) create a package.json file using **npm init --y** and add the following lines

```javascript
  "bin": {
    "nodemonclone": "index.js"
  }
```
here **nodemonclone** will be the global level command (you can give it any name you want)

3) The last step is to link **nodemonclone** to the index.js file so that the code inside index.js gets executed when we run **nodemonclone**

NOTE: For Mac/Unix users, you will need to change permission using below command of the index.js so it can be executed (if doesn't work, try running with sudo).

```shell
 chmod +x index.js   
```

and to link the file just run the command below from within your project folder.
```shell
 npm link   
```

And all done. Now you can run **nodemonclone** and see the console.log output on your terminal.